



QUETZALCOATL:

Favoured Ethics:   Knowledge & Mercy, Animal Offerings
Associates:        Yacetecuhtli, Patecatl, Xochiquetzal, Ehecatl

Sorcery Effects:
  White Wound:     Transforms allies' injuries to fatigue.
  Far Seeing:      Illuminates distant terrain or far-away cities.
  Long Sleep:      Extends your lifespan by entering a dormant state.
  Serpent Nagual:  A guardian spirit defends your city.

Passive Bonuses:
  Master of Lore:  Improves skill of doctors, scholars and priests.
  Find Chosen:     Improves chance of hiring skilled workers and advisors.
  Guiding Star:    Improves astrology and divination outcomes.
  Swift Wind:      Improves speed of long-distance travel and sailing.
  
  Aspect of Knowledge
  Aspect of Winds
  Aspect of Mercy
  Aspect of Light



TLALOC:

Favoured Ethics:   Nature & Growth, Child Offerings
Associates:        Chalchiutlecue, Xochiquetzal, Chicomecoatl

Sorcery Effects:
  Green Flood:     Downpour irrigates crops, risks flooding.
  Plague:          Inflicts a sickness that can spread indefinitely.
  Call Lightning:  Inflicts high damage on enemies, bonus if raining.
  Caiman Nagual:   A guardian spirit defends your city.

Passive Effects:
  Clouds' Bounty:  Improves yield from fisheries, crops and forestry.
  Eternal Life:    Jade & gems have added value & improve health.
  Cleansing:       Improves sanitation and reduces child mortality.
  Clear Running:   Hastens travel by lakes, canals or seas.
  
  Aspect of Fertility
  Aspect of Jade
  Aspect of Clarity
  Aspect of Disease



XIPE TOTEC:

Favoured Ethics:   Wealth & Growth, Mutilation & Warfare
Associates:        Coatlicue, Centeotl, Chicomecoatl, Tlazolteotl

Sorcery Effects:
  Red Rust:        Destroys bronze & iron armaments.
  Hand of Decay:   Inflicts disease and aging on enemies.
  Renewal:         Returns the recently slain from death.
  Golem Nagual:    A guardian spirit defends your city.

Passive Bonuses:
  Telluric Arts:   Improves skill of potters, smiths and goldsmiths.
  Ripening:        Hastens maturation of crops, especially maize.
  Lead to Gold:    Converts a % of all non-precious metals to gold.
  Earth to Earth:  Soil fertility improves after battles.
  
  Aspect of Growth
  Aspect of Crafts
  Aspect of Earth
  Aspect of Gold



TEZCATLIPOCA:

Favoured Ethics:   Power & Freedom, Volunteer Sacrifice
Associates:        Tlazolteotl, Itztli, Coyolxauhqui, Mixcoatl

Sorcery Effects:
  Smoke & Mirrors: Allows troops to move undetected, bonus by night.
  Reflection:      Creates a doppelganger envoy as a spy.
  Seed of Enmity:  Increase chance of revolt & mutiny among foes.
  Jaguar Nagual:   A guardian spirit defends your city.

Passive Bonuses:
  Glamour & Charm: Bonus to festivals and entertainment venues.
  Black Fang:      Bonus to mining, crafting and use of obsidian.
  Gift of Chance:  Improves random outcomes, especially for the poor.
  Seal the Pact:   Bonus to all Sorcery effects after sacrifice.
  
  Aspect of Obsidian
  Aspect of Chance
  Aspect of Sorcery
  Aspect of Beauty



MICTECACEHUATL:

Favoured Ethics:   Ancestry, Grave Goods & Cannibalism
Associates:        Coatlicue, Xolotl, Coyolxauhqui, Itzapapalotl

Sorcery Effects:
  Vengeful Soul:   Summon fallen as avenging spirits.
  Gate of Mictlan: Underworld passage allows quest to retrieve dead.
  Swallow Sun:     Turns day into night, inflicts fear.
  Spider Nagual:   A guardian spirit defends your city.

Passive Bonuses:
  Consumption:     All meat in diet counts toward sacrifice.
  Grave Goods:     Boost morale from tombs/memorials & Day of Dead.
  Ancestral Voice: Gain a skilled family advisor.
  Transmigration:  Animal growth improved by mortality.
  
  Aspect of Consumption
  Aspect of Ancestry
  Aspect of Burial
  Aspect of Return



HUITZILIPOCHTLI:

Favoured Ethics:   Bravery, Warfare & Captive Sacrifice
Associates:        Tonatiuh, Xiutecuhtli, Toci Quilaztli

Sorcery Effects:
  Blue Serpent:    Consuming flame jumps between nearby enemies.
  Rising Sun:      Clears up rainfall or darkness, stuns foes.
  Drought:         Inflicts famine and thirst on a rival city.
  Eagle Nagual:    A guardian spirit defends your city.

Passive Bonuses:
  Hearth Flower:   Bonus to cottage industries, including child-rearing.
  Air of Command:  Raises loyalty of allies and vassals, especially Mexica.
  Fire of Wrath:   Boosts morale & skill of allies when attacked.
  March of Days:   Sacrifices marking solar calendar stave off End Times.
  
  Aspect of Birth
  Aspect of Command
  Aspect of Wrath
  Aspect of Time



RATINGS SYSTEM
  
  Major Ethics:
  Power   vs. Mercy      Victory in battle   vs.  Minimising casualties
  Freedom vs. Order      Independence        vs.  Obedience & structure
  Nature  vs. Man        Untamed wilderness  vs.  Large urban populations
  
  Enviromental Traits:
  Water   vs. Fire       Lakes & rivers vs. Desert
  Earth   vs. Air        High places vs. Low places
  Day     vs. Night      Day vs. Night months, Fog-of-war
  
  TZ:  Power, Freedom, Air, Night
  QZ:  Order, Mercy, Air, Day
  TL:  Nature, Water, Freedom
  XT:  Nature, Earth, Building
  HZ:  Power, Fire
  MC:  Earth, Dark



Minor Deities/Associates/Aspects

Big ones are
  Night (Coyolxauhqui, Itzapapalotl) and Day (Tonatiuh & Xiutecuhtli)
  Death (Xolotl) and Life (Xochiquetzal & Chicomecoatl)
  Elements (Chalchiutlicue & Ehacatl)
  Nature & Hunting (Mixcoatl & Tepeyollotl, the 400 Rabbits)
  Purity (Patecatl) and Filth (Tlazolteotl)
  Ometecuhtli and Omecihuatl (Creation)



Tonatiuh-        the older sun god
Xiutecuhtli-     fire, the solar calendar & new century ceremonies
Zacatzontli-     patron of day travel/eagles
Piltzintecuhtli- patron of the day and healing
Chantico-        goddess of the hearth, rel Toci/Quilaztli?
Nanahuatzin-     sacrificed self to become son, aspect of Xolotl?

Yacetecuhtli-    writing & accounting, trade & merchants
Patecatl-        healing, drugs & remedies, physicians & scholars
Ixtlilton-       another god of healing, related to night, friend of Xochipilli
Chimalma-        mother of Quetzalcoatl, catches arrows.

Mixcoatl-        hunter, warrior & animal shapeshifter
Opochtli-        possible alias for Mixcoatl
Mayahuel-        maguey plants, mother of the 400 rabbits, rel Xochiquetzal?
Tepoztecatl-     one of the 400.  Tlilhua & Toltecatl are others.
The 400 Rabbits- intoxication and excess.
Huehuecoyotl-    old coyote, tricker god, friend of Xolotl

Tepeyollotl-     jaguar incarnation of Tz, mountain heart
Huexolotl-       turkey incarnation of Tz, aka Chalchiuhtotolin
Itztli-          sacrifice & obsidian, war, hard justice
Itztlacoliuhqui- winter, frost, killing

Xochiquetzal-    beauty, sensation & luxury crafts, homosexuality
Xochipilli-      male version of Xochiquetzal
Chicomecoatl-    maize, agriculture & rebirth
Chalchiutlicue-  lakes, rivers & fishing, birth & chastity
Centeotl-        maize god

Itzapapalotl-    'obsidian butterfly'- also eclipses
Coyolxauhqui-    the moon & eclipses, stars & milky way
Citlalicue-      another creator of stars
Xolotl-          misfortune and deformity, protecting the dead
Metztli-         moon goddess, possibly same as Coyolxauhqui
Tecciztecatl-    male moongod

The Earth Goddesses:
Coatlicue-       the consuming earth, caves & quakes, death & decay
Toci Quilaztli-  hearth & home, pregnancy & female bravery
Tlaltecuhtli-    earth god/dess
Tlazolteotl-     filth & purity, sin & confession, saunas & whoring

The Creator Gods:
Ometecuhtli and Omecihuatl


Lords of the Night
  Centeotl Chalchiuhtlicue
  Mictlantecuhtli Piltzintecuhtli
  Tepeyollotl Tezcatlipoca
  Tlaloc Tlazolteotl Xiuhtecuhtli

Lords of the Day
  Centeotl Chalchiuhtlicue
  Citlalicue Mictecacihuatl
  Mictlantecuhtli Quetzalcoatl
  Tezcatlipoca Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli
  Tlaloc Tlaltecuhtli Tlazolteotl
  Tonatiuh Xiuhtecuhtli


Creatures & Beings:
Cipactli-        the dragon of chaos.
Chaneque-        quite similar to faeries.
Ahuizotl-        aquatic monster.
Quinametzin-     similar to nephilim.
Cihuateteo-      vengeful ghosts of women.
Tzitzimime-      female star demons.



